

lest we forget


 - "coordinated universal time"; people should be able to coordinate
   "large-scale events"; a performer can announce: "climax at t-32 bars" and
   share a "marker" that the other performers can use to make preparations such
   as code that responds to the timestamp delta (negative is "pre-build-up",
   positive is "post-build-up"). bonus if the interface automatically shows the
   diff as a countdown (or "countup" after arrival).

   in relation to strudel/flok: everybody run their own strudel instance, and
   only ctrl+enters/code are distributed; over enough time people roughly hear
   the same music but it's not "coordinated" in the sense I'm talking about;
   people may be "separated" by many beats or bars in practice, and patterns
   can easily have a periods of many bars.


 - video synth should be able to respond to audio by accepting patterns and
   signals as input. the other way around is probably unwise (leads to
   "multi-master"-like challenges which are probably not worth the trouble?)


 - in relation to strudel:
   - the ability to control audio parameters independently of note onsets. in
     strudel you can only assign a parameter, say `.lpf()`, at note onset; the
     "exceptions" are all "special cases", such as `.lpenv()`; I want inputs
     like `.lpf()` themselves to accept patterns that aren't locked to note
     events.
   - real control over audio graph (hopefully without making "preset composing"
     (like `s("piano")`) any harder)


 - in relation to flok:
   - no globally shared screen layout; instead give people strong "spectator
     tools" (also opening the door for spectator-only / video synth only /
     youtube-render modes)
   - push towards "smaller independently edited islands"; on the surface flok
     is a "collaboratively edited environment" but people already tend to
     "inhabit their own island" most of the time. having too many cursors in
     the same place takes away "the choice of when to press ctrl+enter";
     ctrl+enter may be delayed because of other people's syntax errors due to
     edits-in-progress, or code may be prematurely ctrl+entered before you're
     ready. it also raises deep and complicated questions about undo/redo (can
     /I/ undo /your/ stuff? what if there's a "merge conflict"?). just because
     "multiplayer editing" kinda works in google docs doesn't mean it
     automatically works for code: it is a lot stricter and unforgiving than a
     human reader. I think having each section corresponding to a "$:" be its
     own "island" might be a good middle ground.
   - support for staged/suggested/queued edits? I don't want to prevent people
     from working very closely together, almost stepping on each other's toes,
     but instead of ctrl+entering something on somebody else's island, maybe
     you could add a "suggested patch" that the "island custodian" can see and
     then ctrl+enter at their own convenience?
   - solidarity tools: the ability to see other people's CPU load? it's nice to
     get some automatic feedback because complaining is hard. maybe things like
     FPS, idle time and asset sync status are also interesting. by asset sync I
     mean: you won't hear s("piano") until the piano samples have been
     downloaded; the "asset sync status" would reveal if people are currently
     downloading data (+an ETA maybe?), or are up-to-date.
   - parent/shared code vs leaf code; parent code is where you can add bpm,
     shared chord progressions, timestamp markers, shared data and functions,
     but it's probably not allowed to add actual patterns and music here. leaf
     code is where music is written, but leafs never act as dependencies for
     other code. but: video synths may be an exception. also: it might be a
     good idea to allow performers to quickly "steal" code snippets from others
     (a quicker and less intrusive alternative to moving the code to a "parent
     code island"). also it's a good question what happens when parent code is
     updated? maybe two modes are both useful: one where your leaf code is
     automatically updated when the parent dependencies are updated (but only
     using the latest "committed" / ctrl+entered code), and another mode where
     you're notified of pending changes, but can accept them when you're ready.


 - I might like the idea of "prefix strings", like `s(p"hh*4")` instead of
   `s("hh*4")`.
   - done with a "preprocessor" that looks at the JS token stream (from acornjs
     probably), and when it finds a string prefixed by a letter it converts it
     into a proper "pattern object".
   - it would allow for different ways of defining patterns. a step-sequencer
     pattern could be something like:
       s"X..x..x.X..x..x."
   - it could be a stdlib/userspace thing; you could define new ad-hoc pattern
     parsers (the code probably comes before even "parent code" though, because
     "parent code" can still contain shared patterns?)
   - i'm conflicted about "naked strings": should s("hh") still work? one
     option is "no"; another option is "yes, but you get a warning and no
     flashing/highlighting", a third option is "yes, it's equivalent to a
     p-prefixed string" (so s("hh") and s(p"hh") are equivalent). one problem
     is that "foo"+"bar" doesn't give you "foobar" in strudel, but 'foo'+'bar'
     does (but isn't a pattern). prefixes may help you realize that "something
     funny is going on"? would you expect p"foo" + p"bar" to become p"foobar"?
     on the other hand, sometimes a bit of weirdness and inconsistency can make
     things easier to use with time. also: JS doesn't have operator
     overloading, so it's not possible to make p"foo"+p"bar"==p"foobar" work.


 - previews / pre-hear / staging. the ability to try something locally before
   entering it into the main mix. a counter-argument may be that you prefer the
   chaos/directness/accidents, but... personally I can't help ofte using
   `.gain(0.05)` to "tiptoe around" before raising the gain when I start liking
   what I hear. I think it helps build confidence in some people.


 - i'd like to explore the use of colors as an additional "dimension" in the
   code/text editor. so in strudel terms:
     s("<hh hh hh hh>*16")
   would play 16th note hihats. But if you could give the "hh"'s different
   colors you could also write code that maps it to some parameter, or reacts
   to it, like "sometimes don't play the red notes".


 - must be ready for live settings, big venues, PA systems:
   - must be a reliable and rock solid tool
   - must be possible to "attach" a "multi-output audio server slave" running
     in nodejs; make your sound engineer happy (and by extension your audience)
     by providing individual outputs instead of one "stereo output" (browsers
     seem hardwired to 2ch output?  also, browsers may spend many cycles on
     UI/video synth, which makes the audio output less reliable)
   - a "video server slave" is similarly interesting (although this would
     probably just be a browser in spectator mode unless webgl is a nodejs
     thing?)
   - tap-in and fine tempo control given to the "conductor", allowing
     synchronizing to a live band? (instead of the common approach of people
     following a "click track").
   - export patterns and signals as: OSC, MIDI, DMX512,...


 - journal "file"?
   - a recording of a performance as a timestamped series of user interactions
   - multiple uses:
     - software reliability is strengthened by reproducibility; a journal can
       help reproduce the steps that led to a problem
     - better video export of performances because you can act as a spectator
       after the fact.
     - "better than video export"; get up'n'close with performers; copy-paste
       their stuff; edit it; great for learning/studies
     - experimentally speaking, a journal file of diffs can enable "time
       travel", which could act as an alternative to undo/redo, which is
       already problematic in its traditional sense in a collaborative editor.
       things like: griefer protection in public rooms, "oops I want to
       reintroduce the pattern I deleted 5 minutes ago as a leitmotif" (rewind,
       copy what you need, return to present time)
     - maybe it even makes state distribution easier because it corresponds to
       "tailing the journal".


 - solid core + fluid stdlib design? (linux kernel/userspace inspired?). the
   idea is to...
   - preserve validity of old journal files..
   - preserve validity of weird stdlib hacks you did during a performance...
   - allow the fluidity of the "stdlib"; frequent changes, ad-hoc experiments,
	 etc
   would entail:
   - storing stdlib and stdlib edits in journal files
   - "we never break userspace" philosophy in the core/kernel (motto stolen
	 from Linux, but it applies?)
   also nice:
   - "self documenting" stdlib? you can probably go directly to source in the
	 app? maybe slightly inspired by golang; you have generated-from-source
	 docs via doc-comments, and links back to the source. also means the
	 documentation could be generated on the fly inside the program.


